vs Artificial intelegence Accountability in publishing

Godmorning, todays talk is going to #Human intelegence vs Artificial intelegence Accountability in publishing.
 

We will start talking about Human intelegence, human intelegence is according to Britnaica "mental quality that consists of the abilities to learn from experience, adapt to new situations, understand and handle abstract concepts, and use knowledge to manipulate one’s environment." The main part of that is our cognetive ability, The cognetive ability is generally located to the neocortex which can be seen as a stack of neurons which interconect in a dynamic network, The pattern recognintion teory of the mind(PRTM), common in cognetive psykology models our memories as interconnected neuron stacks of memories that is connected to pattern recogising clusters, these clusters help us recognise our stimuli based on previous experiencese and knowledge stored in our memories as compressed structures of linked memories which show similiar these patterns are then recognized as the input stimuli we precive. 
An other very important concept in biology is the efficiency of imperfection and in all read and write operations in biology the "copying" is imperfect hass errors/variation and there for att each interaction with a memory it changes somewhat
If we look att the modern ideas of Machine Learning and Neural networks these have been model based on PRTM and therfore simulate the though process. If we look at LLM each iteration of the statistical model sligthly changes the text. (check LLMs)
If we look at diffuse models as in image generation we start with a image that is labeled most closly to the prompt. After which we take a image of random nosie change it a little and see if it looks like what the original is, this can be seen as very close to the process the brain uses pattern recognition to interpet visual stimuli And the connection and variation over stacks of interconected neuron works in many ways the same as our cognetive patterns from prior experience, this means that or AI models today have very similar working models to biological intelegence of vertebrates. I will come back to this later, now considering Accountability and publishing connect we have to look at the current requirements of autorship, which has been excellently presented by the other presenters in this course,  so what does autorship meam. According to Science and its publisher, AAAS, the science society an Autor fullfills these criteria substantial contributions to conception and design or acquisition of data or analysis and interpretation of data or the drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content and gives final approval of the version to be published.
the ICMJE,International Committee of Medical Journal Editors, they add a forth one the Autour of a publication is in agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the
work in ensuring that questions related to the accu-racy or integrity of any part of the work are appropri-ately investigated and resolved.
so can AI be autours well as previous speakers have said accoding to COPE, No AI tools cannot meet the requirements for authorship as they cannot take responsibility for the submitted work. As non-legal entities, they cannot assert the presence or absence of conflicts of interest nor manage copyright and license agreements. 
I would argue that although the current versions of chatbots cannot assert prescense or abcence of conflicts of intrest nor manage copyrigtht, that is a matter of regulation and implementation choice rather that a limitation with the AI. But what this boils down to is then Accountability can the AI be accountable,
According  to Cambridge Dictionary accountability is the fact of being responsible for what you do and able to give a satisfactory reason for it, or the degree to which this happens. 
Well AI and Chatbots today can answer and rephrase their text without losing significant meaning to us but the AI today is not self-aware, and as self awareness is a key concept in anthropocentric views of accountability it cannot be held responsible for the content it generates. In the example of chatGPT the AI model operates solely based on statistical patterns in the data it was trained on and does not have the ability to comprehend the meaning or implications of the text it generates, as it does not comprehend can it be held accountable?
Thefore today accountability lies with the user and not the machine.
Cirling back to the start if Human intelegence and AI intelegence follow similar patterns of cognition is it not reasonable to argue that given the abiliy of ai to find information and to interpet it today, we must also se that it can be implemented in a way where it can hold accountability in all aspects except it self-awareness.
This concludes my talk.
Thank you for Listening I hope you are as intrigued and confused about the issue as I am.

I would like to thank the FSCI 2023 organisers for the opportunity to speak
Francis P. Crawley for inviting me to participate and for all the interesting conversations you start.
Finally i would like to thank Uppsala University, SND (Swedish National Data Service), NBIS(National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden) and the RDA(Research Data Alliance) for letting me work with these interesting questions.



